CNV#29336: Document USB host passthrough (GA) (#77072)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/virt-enabling-usb-host-passthrough.adoc

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * virt/advanced_vm_management/virt-configuring-usb-host-passthrough.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="virt-enabling-usb-host-passthrough_{context}"]
= Enabling USB host passthrough

You can enable USB host passthrough at the cluster level.

> You specify a resource name and USB device name for each device you want to add and then assign to a virtual machine (VM). You can allocate more than one device, each of which is known as a `selector` in the HyperConverged (HCO) custom resource (CR), to a single resource name. If you have multiple, identical USB devices on the cluster, you can choose to allocate a VM to a specific device.

Reviewer: > You specify a resource name and USB device name for each device you want to add and then assign _[the names? the device?]_ to a virtual machine (VM). 

> You can allocate more than one device, each of which is known as a `selector` _[I get what this means, but might be rewritten to satisfy the repo guidelines, e.g. "Each device is represented by a `selector` object/property...]_ in the HyperConverged (HCO) custom resource (CR), to a single resource name.

Author: @maxwelldb, I don't understand the second comment. Is there a source or style guide link you can provide?

Reviewer: For posterity:

ISG: "When you refer to a command, parameter, or option in running text, specify the word command, parameter, or option after the name. Command, parameter, and option names are not translated, so without the identifying noun, users might be confused about what the name represents. Alternatively, refer to a command, parameter, or option by using a lowercase descriptive phrase, such as one that includes an adjective and a noun."

Same guidance, essentially, for programming elements.

In general, if something is backticked in running text, it has to function as an adjective for translation's sake.

> You specify a resource name and USB device name for each device you want first to add and then assign to a virtual machine (VM). You can allocate more than one device, each of which is known as a `selector` in the HyperConverged (HCO) custom resource (CR), to a single resource name. If you have multiple, identical USB devices on the cluster, you can choose to allocate a VM to a specific device.

Reviewer 2: @xpivarc @tiraboschi The meaning of the word "selector" in particular can be lost in translation to other languages. Understood that that's what it's called in the yaml, but is there a descriptive adjective that could be added here to help make the meaning of the word less ambiguous? "selector option"? "selector parameter"?

Author: @stu-gott . @tiraboschi , @dbasunag, Thanks for all of your help on the issue of further qualifying selector. I've got Catherine Tomasko's okay to go ahead and get the PR merged as is.

(If we later find that there is a good additional descriptor for selector, you can let me know and I'll fix the content.) 

cc:@ctomasko

.Prerequisites

> * Enabling the passthrough requires cluster administrator privileges.

Reviewer 3: suggestion to keep similar wording to other procedures in the docs:
```suggestion
* You have access to an {product-title} cluster as a user with the `cluster-admin` role.
```

Author: Thanks!

> * You have access to an {product-title} cluster as a user with the `cluster-admin` role.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* You have access to an {product-title} cluster as a user that has the `cluster-admin` role.
```

ISG loves restrictive clauses for things like this.

Author: Done!

.Procedure

. Identify the USB device vendor and product by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ lsusb
----

. Open the HCO CR by running the following commmand:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc edit hyperconverged kubevirt-hyperconverged -n openshift-cnv
----

. Add a USB device to the `permittedHostDevices` stanza, as shown in the following example:

+

> .Example YAML snippet

Reviewer 3: excellent YAML snippet! 😄

[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: hco.kubevirt.io/v1beta1
kind: HyperConverged
metadata:
   name: kubevirt-hyperconverged
   namespace: {CNVNamespace}
spec:
  configuration:
    permittedHostDevices: <1>

>       usb: <2>

Reviewer 4: it's named `usbHostDevices`, see:
https://github.com/kubevirt/hyperconverged-cluster-operator/blob/53e7b476314f476313966f7f8f181ce48552223d/api/v1beta1/hyperconverged_types.go#L525

Author: @tiraboschi, I'm not sure what should be updated. Should **permittedHostDevices** become **PermittedHostDevices**? And should **usb** become **USBHostDevices**?

Reviewer 4: ```yaml
---
apiVersion: hco.kubevirt.io/v1beta1
kind: HyperConverged
metadata:
  name: kubevirt-hyperconverged
  namespace: {CNVNamespace}
spec:
  permittedHostDevices:
    usbHostDevices:
    - resourceName: kubevirt.io/peripherals
      selectors:
        - vendor: "045e"
          product: "07a5"
        - vendor: "062a"
          product: "4102"
        - vendor: "072f"
          product: "b100"
```

+
[source,terminal]
----
$ lsusb
----

. Open the HyperConverged (HCO) custom resource (CR) by running the following commmand:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc edit hyperconverged kubevirt-hyperconverged -n openshift-cnv
----

. Edit the CR by performing the following actions, as shown in the example that follows:

.. Enable the `HostDevices` feature gate by adding it to the `spec.featureGates` stanza.
.. Add a USB device to the `permittedHostDevices` stanza.

+
.Example YAML snippet
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: hco.kubevirt.io/v1beta1
kind: HyperConverged
metadata:
   name: kubevirt-hyperconverged
   namespace: {CNVNamespace}
spec:
  featureGates:
    hostDevices: True <1>
# ...
  configuration:
    permittedHostDevices: <2>
      usb: <3>
        - resourceName: kubevirt.io/peripherals <4>
          selectors:
            - vendor: "045e"
              product: "07a5"
            - vendor: "062a"
              product: "4102"
            - vendor: "072f"
              product: "b100"

----
<1> Enables the `hostDevices' feature gate.
<2> Lists the host devices that have permission to be used in the cluster.
<3> Lists the available USB devices.

> <4> Uses `resourceName: deviceName` for each device added and assigned to the VM.

Reviewer 5: not sure if 100% clear but the above would mean that the single resource name `kubevirt.io/peripherals` is binded to 3 usb devices at the same time. That means that when the user allocate one `kubevirt.io/peripherals`, the VM is only scheduled on a Node with this 3 USB devices connected at the same time in which all 3 are going to be redirected to the VM.

In case of doubt, the following commit log has some examples:
https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt/commit/47d4534dedae49cfcbe58f6367ea196c5dc12885

Author: Hi @victortoso , and thanks for looking! Are you saying that having the VM scheduled on a node with three USB devices is not how the USB passthrough should be configured? Or are you saying that it would be helpful to explain this further in the documentation so that it is more clear? 

I did see this in the link you provided:

A few helpful assumptions that make understanding the whole:

 1. We create one USB Device Plugin per resource name
 2. Each USB Selector defines a single USB device
 3. **Each resource name can have multiple USB selectors**

Reviewer 5: My comment is just to be sure that the example and the expectation are in sync. If they are, we are good.
The idea behind multiple usb devices per k8s device is to allow multiple use cases like usb + keyboard or devices that might depend on each other.

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * virt/advanced_vm_management/virt-configuring-usb-host-passthrough.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="virt-enabling-usb-host-passthrough_{context}"]
= Enabling USB host passthrough

You can enable USB host passthrough at the cluster level.

You specify a resource name and USB device name for each device you want to add and then assign to a virtual machine (VM). You can allocate more than one device, each of which is known as a `selector` in the HyperConverged (HCO) custom resource (CR), to a single resource name. If you have multiple, identical USB devices on the cluster, you can choose to allocate a VM to a specific device.

.Prerequisites

* Enabling the passthrough requires cluster administrator privileges.

.Procedure

. Identify the USB device vendor and product by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ lsusb
----

. Open the HCO CR by running the following commmand:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc edit hyperconverged kubevirt-hyperconverged -n openshift-cnv
----

. Edit the CR by performing the following actions, as shown in the example that follows:

> .. Enable the `HostDevices` feature gate by adding it to the `spec.featureGates` stanza.

Reviewer 6: again, I don't think this is needed.

Author: Removed.

.. Add a USB device to the `permittedHostDevices` stanza.

+
.Example YAML snippet
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: hco.kubevirt.io/v1beta1
kind: HyperConverged
metadata:
   name: kubevirt-hyperconverged
   namespace: {CNVNamespace}
spec:
  featureGates:

>     hostDevices: True <1>

Reviewer 4: HCO API are not exposing a feature gate like this: `kvHostDevicesGate` is permanently set and can't be modified by the end user.

https://github.com/kubevirt/hyperconverged-cluster-operator/blob/84c79b00720e32c54f1a25baff18a1e03f095586/controllers/operands/kubevirt.go#L62-L79

Author: @acardace, because of this comment from Simone and your comment about the feature gate, I removed it from the YAML example. If I need to include it, just let me know.

# ...
  configuration:
    permittedHostDevices: <2>
      usb: <3>
        - resourceName: kubevirt.io/peripherals <4>
          selectors:
            - vendor: "045e"
              product: "07a5"
            - vendor: "062a"
              product: "4102"
            - vendor: "072f"

>               product: "b100"

Reviewer 7: @tiraboschi Do we have this?

Reviewer 4: No, actually only `PciHostDevices` and `MediatedDevices`.
see: https://github.com/kubevirt/hyperconverged-cluster-operator/blob/84c79b00720e32c54f1a25baff18a1e03f095586/api/v1beta1/hyperconverged_types.go#L505-L514

Author: @acardace,  is **permittedHostDevices** now available?

Reviewer 6: yes, but the API actually looks different:

```
apiVersion: hco.kubevirt.io/v1beta1
kind: HyperConverged
metadata:
   name: kubevirt-hyperconverged
   namespace: {CNVNamespace}
spec:
   permittedHostDevices: (1)
     usb: (2)
       - resourceName: kubevirt.io/peripherals (3)
         selectors:
           - vendor: "045e"
             product: "07a5"
           - vendor: "062a"
             product: "4102"
          - vendor: "072f"
            product: "b100"
```

@tiraboschi can you double check?
